well since the War Began on October the
7th Israel's bombing campaign across
Gaza has killed 805 Palestinians that's
according to the health Ministry 114
people have been killed in the occupied
West Bank in nearly three weeks and two
Palestinian prisoners died in Israeli
custody Israel says that was due to
natural causes the Israeli government
says more than 1,400 Israelis were
killed in hamas's attack three weeks
ago
Let's uh bring in Kenneth rth now he is
the former Executive Director of Human
Rights Watch and a visiting professor at
Princeton University joins us from New
York welcome to the program so put
simply how would you describe what's
happening across Gaza at the
moment well I think we very likely have
war crimes being committed um we
obviously had war crimes to start this
all off with Hamas slaughtering Israeli
civilians and abducting them and firing
weapons indiscriminately into civilian
populated areas but we know that under
International humanitarian law war
crimes by one side do not justify war
crimes by the other each side has an
independent obligation to respect the
laws of war and we see Israel violating
them I think most recently if we look at
what's happening with A's hospital um
even if there is some Hamas facility
underneath and we don't even know that
you know Israel made a a similar
allegation regarding alifa which must n
but when you have
14,000 people in the hospital many in
critical situations where they can't be
moved um an evacuation order doesn't
suffice and it's wrong to suggest that
you know whatever military Advantage
comes from hitting the supposed Hamas
facility underneath would justify the
wholly disproportionate harm to
civilians so that's an example of
violating the rule against um
disproportionate attacks that that
harmed the civilian population you know
we similarly are seeing indiscriminate
attacks entire neighborhoods being
flattened and you know Kem Khan was just
in Egypt um on the the Gaza border he's
the international criminal court
prosecutor um what's interesting he's
been pretty much aall until now but
suddenly he's revived and he says
blocking Aid in essence is a war crime
he didn't put it in explicitly those
terms but he essentially is saying I've
got an active investigation it violates
humanitarian not to allow Aid to the
civilian population and he's basically
threatening Israel with war crimes
charges as he reiterated that homas is
actions were war on so um there has been
some movement now in terms of um finally
the international criminal court make
clear that there might be some
accountability for this complete
flouting of international humanitarian
law by both sides as you alluded to
there how important is it to note that
the rules of law here are uh
non-reciprocal meaning they apply
irrespective of what each side may have
done well that's essential because I
mean if you just think about in any War
their passions on both sides you know
day one typically one side is accusing
the other of war crimes now you know in
this case we know war crimes did launch
this this latest exchange on October 7th
what Hamas did was you know blatant war
crimes but that's not the end of the
matter you know if if um if that were
enough to then justify Israeli war
crimes you would have no laws of war no
humanitarian law and virtually any
conflict so these are non-reciprocal
obligations they are absolute obl
obligations on each party so it's not
enough for Israel to say oh we have a
right to to defend ourselves you know we
have a right to respond to Hamas sure
but that does not mean a right to ignore
International humanitarian law and you
know Biden to his credit said that today
after his conversation with Netanyahu um
he didn't go so far as to say and you're
violating those laws but you know you
could read between the lines that
clearly is happening but it was good to
see Biden conditioning his you know
traditional statement Israel has a right
to respond a right to defend itself with
an absolute requirement that that
defense be in compliance with
humanitarian law which of course it is
not given what you say then how
important is it to document uh events
for the future however difficult that
might be uh during a conflict
situation it's essential to do that but
you know there are always incidents that
stand out I mean the blocking of
humanitarian Aid is is n a complicated
thing to document everybody can see that
you know going back in time the
settlements in the West Bank are
violations of of the laws of war they
violate article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention which say that an occupying
power cannot transfer its population to
occupi territory so that's a simple War
crime if you look at the bombing I mean
I was struck the other day when I
learned that um Israel had bombed the
Islamic University of Gaza ostensibly
because it was training Hamas
intelligence operators you know by that
logic you know my University Princeton
could be bombed because some of the
students go on to work at the CIA I mean
that's crazy that's not what the laws of
war require so I think that while you
know clearly we want to document as much
as we can it sometimes is difficult in
the exchanges of War to look at every
single case but certain ones stand out
where there just is no justification and
those are situations where the
international criminal court prosecutor
clearly should be concentrating his
attention and moving as expeditiously as
possible to issue war crimes charges
because once that happens once people
realize that there are criminal
consequences to this conduct it's more
likely to stop Kenneth Roth thank you
very much indeed for your insights here
on Al jaaz today thank you for having me